                THE DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS M.A.  F.R.S.

            CLERK OF THE ACTS AND SECRETARY TO THE ADMIRALTY

   TRANSCRIBED FROM THE SHORTHAND MANUSCRIPT IN THE PEPYSIAN LIBRARY
MAGDALENE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE BY THE REV. MYNORS BRIGHT M.A. LATE FELLOW
                      AND PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE

                              (Unabridged)

                      WITH LORD BRAYBROOKE'S NOTES

                        EDITED WITH ADDITIONS BY

                        HENRY B. WHEATLEY F.S.A.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                           NOVEMBER & DECEMBER
                                  1661

November 1st.  I went this morning with Sir W. Pen by coach to
Westminster, and having done my business at Mr. Montagu's, I went back to
him at Whitehall, and from thence with him to the 3 Tun Tavern, at Charing
Cross, and there sent for up the maister of the house's dinner, and dined
very well upon it, and afterwards had him and his fayre sister (who is
very great with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen in mirth) up to us, and
looked over some medals that they shewed us of theirs; and so went away to
the Theatre, to "The Joviall Crew," and from hence home, and at my house
we were very merry till late, having sent for his son, Mr. William Pen,

     [The celebrated Quaker, and founder of Pennsylvania.]

lately come from Oxford.  And after supper parted, and to bed.

2d.  At the office all the morning; where Sir John Minnes, our new
comptroller, was fetched by Sir Wm. Pen and myself from Sir Wm. Batten's,
and led to his place in the office.  The first time that he had come
hither, and he seems a good fair condition man, and one that I am glad
hath the office.  After the office done, I to the Wardrobe, and there
dined, and in the afternoon had an hour or two's talk with my Lady with
great pleasure.  And so with the two young ladies by coach to my house,
and gave them some entertainment, and so late at night sent them home with
Captain Ferrers by coach.  This night my boy Wayneman, as I was in my
chamber, I overheard him let off some gunpowder; and hearing my wife chide
him below for it, and a noise made, I call him up, and find that it was
powder that he had put in his pocket, and a match carelessly with it,
thinking that it was out, and so the match did give fire to the powder,
and had burnt his side and his hand that he put into his pocket to put out
the fire.  But upon examination, and finding him in a lie about the time
and place that he bought it, I did extremely beat him, and though it did
trouble me to do it, yet I thought it necessary to do it. So to write by
the post, and to bed.

3rd (Lord's day).  This day I stirred not out, but took physique, and it
did work very well, and all the day as I was at leisure I did read in
Fuller's Holy Warr, which I have of late bought, and did try to make a
song in the praise of a liberall genius (as I take my own to be) to all
studies and pleasures, but it not proving to my mind I did reject it and
so proceeded not in it.  At night my wife and I had a good supper by
ourselves of a pullet hashed, which pleased me much to see my condition
come to allow ourselves a dish like that, and so at night to bed.

4th.  In the morning, being very rainy, by coach with Sir W. Pen and my
wife to Whitehall, and sent her to Mrs. Bunt's, and he and I to Mr.
Coventry's about business, and so sent for her again, and all three home
again, only I to the Mitre (Mr. Rawlinson's), where Mr. Pierce, the
Purser, had got us a most brave chine of beef, and a dish of marrowbones.
Our company my uncle Wight, Captain Lambert, one Captain Davies, and
purser Barter, Mr. Rawlinson, and ourselves; and very merry.  After dinner
I took coach, and called my wife at my brother's, where I left her, and to
the Opera, where we saw "The Bondman," which of old we both did so doat
on, and do still; though to both our thinking not so well acted here
(having too great expectations), as formerly at Salisbury-court.  But for
Betterton he is called by us both the best actor in the world.  So home by
coach, I lighting by the way at my uncle Wight's and staid there a little,
and so home after my wife, and to bed.

5th.  At the office all the morning.  At noon comes my brother Tom and Mr.
Armiger to dine with me, and did, and we were very merry.  After dinner, I
having drunk a great deal of wine, I went away, seeming to go about
business with Sir W. Pen, to my Lady Batten's (Sir William being at
Chatham), and there sat a good while, and then went away (before I went I
called at home to see whether they were gone, and found them there, and
Armiger inviting my wife to go to a play, and like a fool would be
courting her, but he is an ass, and lays out money with Tom, otherwise I
should not think him worth half this respect I shew him).  To the Dolphin,
where he and I and Captain Cocke sat late and drank much, seeing the boys
in the streets flying their crackers, this day being kept all the day very
strictly in the City.  At last broke up, and called at my Lady Batten's
again and would have gone to cards, but Sir W. Pen was so fuddled that we
could not try him to play, and therefore we parted, and I home and to bed.

6th.  Going forth this morning I met Mr. Davenport and a friend of his,
one Mr. Furbisher, to drink their morning draft with me, and I did give it
them in good wine, and anchovies, and pickled oysters, and took them to
the Sun in Fish Street, there did give them a barrel of good ones, and a
great deal of wine, and sent for Mr. W. Bernard (Sir Robert's son), a
grocer thereabouts, and were very merry, and cost me a good deal of money,
and at noon left them, and with my head full of wine, and being invited by
a note from Luellin, that came to my hands this morning in bed, I went to
Nick Osborne's at the Victualling Office, and there saw his wife, who he
has lately married, a good sober woman, and new come to their home.  We
had a good dish or two of marrowbones and another of neats' tongues to
dinner, and that being done I bade them adieu and hastened to Whitehall
(calling Mr. Moore by the way) to my Lord Privy Seal, who will at last
force the clerks to bring in a table of their fees, which they have so
long denied, but I do not join with them, and so he is very respectful to
me.  So he desires me to bring in one which I observe in making of fees,
which I will speedily do.  So back again, and endeavoured to speak with
Tom Trice (who I fear is hatching some mischief), but could not, which
vexed me, and so I went home and sat late with pleasure at my lute, and so
to bed.

7th.  This morning came one Mr. Hill (sent by Mr. Hunt, the Instrument
maker), to teach me to play on the Theorbo, but I do not like his play nor
singing, and so I found a way to put him off.  So to the office. And then
to dinner, and got Mr. Pett the Commissioner to dinner with me, he and I
alone, my wife not being well, and so after dinner parted.  And I to Tom
Trice, who in short shewed me a writt he had ready for my father, and I
promised to answer it.  So I went to Dr. Williams (who is now pretty well
got up after his sickness), and after that to Mr. Moore to advise, and so
returned home late on foot, with my mind cleared, though not satisfied.  I
met with letters at home from my Lord from Lisbone, which speak of his
being well; and he tells me he had seen at the court there the day before
he wrote this letter, the Juego de Toro.--[A bull fight.  See May 24th,
1662.--B:]--So fitted myself for bed. Coming home I called at my uncle
Fenner's, who tells that Peg Kite now hath declared she will have the
beggarly rogue the weaver, and so we are resolved neither to meddle nor
make with her.

8th.  This morning up early, and to my Lord Chancellor's with a letter to
him from my Lord, and did speak with him; and he did ask me whether I was
son to Mr. Talbot Pepys or no (with whom he was once acquainted in the
Court of Requests), and spoke to me with great respect.  Thence to
Westminster Hall (it being Term time) and there met with Commissioner
Pett, and so at noon he and I by appointment to the Sun in New Fish
Street, where Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and we all were to dine, at an
invitation of Captain Stoaks and Captain Clerk, and were very merry, and
by discourse I found Sir J. Minnes a fine gentleman and a very good
scholler.  After dinner to the Wardrobe, and thence to Dr. Williams, who
went with me (the first time that he has been abroad a great while) to the
Six Clerks Office to find me a clerk there able to advise me in my
business with Tom Trice, and after I had heard them talk, and had given me
some comfort, I went to my brother Tom's, and took him with me to my coz.
Turner at the Temple, and had his opinion that I should not pay more than
the principal L200, with which I was much pleased, and so home.

9th.  At the office all the morning.  At noon Mr. Davenport, Phillips, and
Mr. Wm.  Bernard and Furbisher, came by appointment and dined with me, and
we were very merry.  After dinner I to the Wardrobe, and there staid
talking with my Lady all the afternoon till late at night.  Among other
things my Lady did mightily urge me to lay out money upon my wife, which I
perceived was a little more earnest than ordinary, and so I seemed to be
pleased with it, and do resolve to bestow a lace upon her, and what with
this and other talk, we were exceeding merry.  So home at night.

10th (Lord's day).  At our own church in the morning, where Mr. Mills
preached.  Thence alone to the Wardrobe to dinner with my Lady, where my
Lady continues upon yesterday's discourse still for me to lay out money
upon my wife, which I think it is best for me to do for her honour and my
own.  Last night died Archibald, my Lady's butler and Mrs. Sarah's
brother, of a dropsy, which I am troubled at.  In the afternoon went and
sat with Mr. Turner in his pew at St. Gregory's, where I hear our Queen
Katherine, the first time by name as such, publickly prayed for, and heard
Dr. Buck upon "Woe unto thee, Corazin," &c., where he started a
difficulty, which he left to another time to answer, about why God should
give means of grace to those people which he knew would not receive them,
and deny to others which he himself confesses, if they had had them, would
have received them, and they would have been effectual too.  I would I
could hear him explain this, when he do come to it.  Thence home to my
wife, and took her to my Aunt Wight's, and there sat a while with her (my
uncle being at Katharine hill), and so home, and I to Sir W. Batten's,
where Captain Cock was, and we sent for two bottles of Canary to the Rose,
which did do me a great deal of hurt, and did trouble me all night, and,
indeed, came home so out of order that I was loth to say prayers to-night
as I am used ever to do on Sundays, which my wife took notice of and
people of the house, which I was sorry for.

11th.  To the Wardrobe, and with Mr. Townsend and Moore to the Saracen's
Head to a barrel of oysters, and so Mr. Moore and I to Tom Trice's, with
whom I did first set my hand to answer to a writt of his this tearm.
Thence to the Wardrobe to dinner, and there by appointment met my wife,
who had by my direction brought some laces for my Lady to choose one for
her.  And after dinner I went away, and left my wife and ladies together,
and all their work was about this lace of hers.  Captain Ferrers and I
went together, and he carried me the first time that ever I saw any gaming
house, to one, entering into Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, at the end of Bell
Yard, where strange the folly of men to lay and lose so much money, and
very glad I was to see the manner of a gamester's life, which I see is
very miserable, and poor, and unmanly.  And thence he took me to a dancing
school in Fleet Street, where we saw a company of pretty girls dance, but
I do not in myself like to have young girls exposed to so much vanity.  So
to the Wardrobe, where I found my Lady had agreed upon a lace for my wife
of L6, which I seemed much glad of that it was no more, though in my mind
I think it too much, and I pray God keep me so to order myself and my
wife's expenses that no inconvenience in purse or honour follow this my
prodigality.  So by coach home.

12th.  At the office all the morning.  Dined at home alone.  So abroad
with Sir W. Pen.  My wife and I to "Bartholomew Fayre," with puppets which
I had seen once before, and Ate play without puppets often, but though I
love the play as much as ever I did, yet I do not like the puppets at all,
but think it to be a lessening to it.  Thence to the Greyhound in Fleet
Street, and there drank some raspberry sack and eat some sasages, and so
home very merry.  This day Holmes come to town; and we do expect hourly to
hear what usage he hath from the Duke and the King about this late
business of letting the Swedish Embassador go by him without striking his
flag.

     [And that, too, in the river Thames itself.  The right of obliging
     ships of all nations to lower topsails, and strike their flag to the
     English, whilst in the British seas, and even on the French coasts,
     had, up to this time, been rigidly enforced.  When Sully was sent by
     Henry IV., in 1603, to congratulate James I. on his accession, and
     in a ship commanded by a vice-admiral of France, he was fired upon
     by the English Admiral Mansel, for daring to hoist the flag of
     France in the presence of that of England, although within sight of
     Calais.  The French flag was lowered, and all Sully's remonstrances
     could obtain no redress for the alleged injury.  According to Rugge,
     Holmes had insisted upon the Swede's lowering his flag, and had even
     fired a shot to enforce the observance of the usual tribute of
     respect, but the ambassador sent his secretary and another gentleman
     on board the English frigate, to assure the captain, upon the word
     and honour of an ambassador, that the king, by a verbal order, had
     given him leave and a dispensation in that particular, and upon this
     false representation he was allowed to proceed on his voyage without
     further question.  This want of caution, and disobedience of orders,
     fell heavily on Holmes, who was imprisoned for two months, and not
     re-appointed to the same ship.  Brahe afterwards made a proper
     submission for the fault he had committed, at his own court.  His
     conduct reminds us of Sir Henry Wotton's definition of an
     ambassador--that he is an honest man sent to lie abroad for the good
     of his country.  A pun upon the term lieger--ambassador.--B.]

13th.  By appointment, we all went this morning to wait upon the Duke of
York, which we did in his chamber, as he was dressing himself in his
riding suit to go this day by sea to the Downs.  He is in mourning for his
wife's grandmother, which is thought a great piece of fondness.

     [Fondness, foolishness.

              "Fondness it were for any, being free,
               To covet fetters, tho' they golden be."
                                   Spenser, Sonnet 37,--M. B.]

After we had given him our letter relating the bad condition of the Navy
for want of money, he referred it to his coming back and so parted, and I
to Whitehall and to see la belle Pierce, and so on foot to my Lord Crew's,
where I found him come to his new house, which is next to that he lived in
last; here I was well received by my Lord and Sir Thomas, with whom I had
great talk: and he tells me in good earnest that he do believe the
Parliament (which comes to sit again the next week), will be troublesome
to the Court and Clergy, which God forbid!  But they see things carried so
by my Lord Chancellor and some others, that get money themselves, that
they will not endure it.  From thence to the Theatre, and there saw
"Father's own Son" again, and so it raining very hard I went home by
coach, with my mind very heavy for this my expensefull life, which will
undo me, I fear, after all my hopes, if I do not take up, for now I am
coming to lay out a great deal of money in clothes for my wife, I must
forbear other expenses.  To bed, and this night began to lie in the little
green chamber, where the maids lie, but we could not a great while get
Nell to lie there, because I lie there and my wife, but at last, when she
saw she must lie there or sit up, she, with much ado, came to bed.

4th.  At the office all the morning.  At noon I went by appointment to the
Sun in Fish Street to a dinner of young Mr. Bernard's for myself, Mr.
Phillips, Davenport, Weaver, &c., where we had a most excellent dinner,
but a pie of such pleasant variety of good things, as in all my life I
never tasted.  Hither came to me Captain Lambert to take his leave of me,
he being this day to set sail for the Straights.  We drank his farewell
and a health to all our friends, and were very merry, and drank wine
enough.  Hence to the Temple to Mr. Turner about drawing up my bill in
Chancery against T. Trice, and so to Salisbury Court, where Mrs. Turner is
come to town to-night, but very ill still of an ague, which I was sorry to
see.  So to the Wardrobe and talked with my Lady, and so home and to bed.

15th.  At home all the morning, and at noon with my wife to the Wardrobe
to dinner, and there, did shew herself to my Lady in the handkercher that
she bought the lace for the other day, and indeed it is very handsome.
Here I left my wife and went to my Lord Privy Seal to Whitehall, and there
did give him a copy of the Fees of the office as I have received them, and
he was well pleased with it.  So to the Opera, where I met my wife and
Captain Ferrers and Madamoiselle Le Blanc, and there did see the second
part of "The Siege of Rhodes" very well done; and so by coach set her
home, and the coach driving down the hill through Thames Street, which I
think never any coach did before from that place to the bridge-foot, but
going up Fish Street Hill his horses were so tired, that they could not be
got to go up the hill, though all the street boys and men did beat and
whip them.  At last I was fain to send my boy for a link, and so light out
of the coach till we got to another at the corner of Fenchurch Street, and
so home, and to bed.

16th.  At the office all the morning.  Dined at home, and so about my
business in the afternoon to the Temple, where I found my Chancery bill
drawn against T. Trice, which I read and like it, and so home.

17th (Lord's day).  To our own church, and at noon, by invitation, Sir W.
Pen dined with me, and I took Mrs. Hester, my Lady Batten's kinswoman, to
dinner from church with me, and we were very merry.  So to church again,
and heard a simple fellow upon the praise of Church musique, and
exclaiming against men's wearing their hats on in the church, but I slept
part of the sermon, till latter prayer and blessing and all was done
without waking which I never did in my life.  So home, and by and by comes
my uncle Wight and my aunt and Mr. Norbury and his lady, and we drank hard
and were very merry till supper time, and then we parted, my wife and I
being invited to Sir W. Pen's, where we also were very merry, and so home
to prayers and to bed.

18th.  By coach with Sir W. Pen; my wife and I toward Westminster, but
seeing Mr. Moore in the street I light and he and I went to Mr.
Battersby's the minister, in my way I putting in at St. Paul's, where I
saw the quiristers in their surplices going to prayers, and a few idle
poor people and boys to hear them, which is the first time I have seen
them, and am sorry to see things done so out of order, and there I
received L50 more, which make up L100 that I now have borrowed of him, and
so I did burn the old bond for L50, and paying him the use of it did make
a new bond for the whole L100. Here I dined and had a good dinner, and his
wife a good pretty woman.  There was a young Parson at the table that had
got himself drunk before dinner, which troubled me to see. After dinner to
Mr. Bowers at Westminster for my wife, and brought her to the Theatre to
see "Philaster," which I never saw before, but I found it far short of my
expectations.  So by coach home.

19th.  At the office all the morning, and coming home found Mr. Hunt with
my wife in the chamber alone, which God forgive me did trouble my head,
but remembering that it was washing and that there was no place else with
a fire for him to be in, it being also cold weather, I was at ease again.
He dined with us, and after dinner took coach and carried him with us as
far as my cozen Scott's, where we set him down and parted, and my wife and
I staid there at the christening of my cozens boy, where my cozen Samuel
Pepys, of Ireland, and I were godfathers, and I did name the child Samuel.
There was a company of pretty women there in the chamber, but we staid
not, but went with the minister into another room and eat and drank, and
at last, when most of the women were gone, Sam and I went into my cozen
Scott, who was got off her bed, and so we staid and talked and were very
merry, my she-cozen, Stradwick, being godmother.  And then I left my wife
to go home by coach, and I walked to the Temple about my law business, and
there received a subpoena for T. Trice.  I carried it myself to him at the
usual house at Doctors Commons and did give it him, and so home and to
bed.  It cost me 20s, between the midwife and the two nurses to-day.

20th.  To Westminster Hall by water in the morning, where I saw the King
going in his barge to the Parliament House; this being the first day of
their meeting again.  And the Bishops, I hear, do take their places in the
Lords House this day.  I walked long in the Hall, but hear nothing of
news, but what Ned Pickering tells me, which I am troubled at, that Sir J.
Minnes should send word to the King, that if he did not remove all my Lord
Sandwich's captains out of this fleet, he believed the King would not be
master of the fleet at its coming again: and so do endeavour to bring
disgrace upon my Lord.  But I hope all that will not do, for the King
loves him.  Hence by water to the Wardrobe, and dined with my Lady, my
Lady Wright being there too, whom I find to be a witty but very conceited
woman and proud.  And after dinner Mr. Moore and I to the Temple, and
there he read my bill and likes it well enough, and so we came back again,
he with me as far as the lower end of Cheapside, and there I gave him a
pint of sack and parted, and I home, and went seriously to look over my
papers touching T. Trice, and I think I have found some that will go near
to do me more good in this difference of ours than all I have before.  So
to bed with my mind cheery upon it, and lay long reading "Hobbs his
Liberty and Necessity," and a little but very shrewd piece, and so to
sleep.

21st.  In the morning again at looking over my last night's papers, and by
and by comes Mr. Moore, who finds that my papers may do me much good. He
staid and dined with me, and we had a good surloyne of rost beefe, the
first that ever I had of my own buying since I kept house; and after
dinner he and I to the Temple, and there showed Mr. Smallwood my papers,
who likes them well, and so I left them with him, and went with Mr. Moore
to Gray's Inn to his chamber, and there he shewed me his old Camden's
"Britannica", which I intend to buy of him, and so took it away with me,
and left it at St. Paul's Churchyard to be bound, and so home and to the
office all the afternoon; it being the first afternoon that we have sat,
which we are now to do always, so long as the Parliament sits, who this
day have voted the King L 120,000

     [A mistake.  According to the journals, L1,200,000.  And see Diary,
     February 29th, 1663-64.--M. B.]

to be raised to pay his debts.  And after the office with Sir W. Batten to
the Dolphin, and drank and left him there, and I again to the Temple about
my business, and so on foot home again and to bed.

22nd.  Within all the morning, and at noon with my wife, by appointment to
dinner at the Dolphin, where Sir W. Batten, and his lady and daughter
Matt, and Captain Cocke and his lady, a German lady, but a very great
beauty, and we dined together, at the spending of some wagers won and lost
between him and I; and there we had the best musique and very good songs,
and were very merry and danced, but I was most of all taken with Madam
Cocke and her little boy, which in mirth his father had given to me.  But
after all our mirth comes a reckoning of L4, besides 40s. to the
musicians, which did trouble us, but it must be paid, and so I took leave
and left them there about eight at night.  And on foot went to the Temple,
and then took my cozen Turner's man Roger, and went by his advice to
Serjeant Fountaine and told him our case, who gives me good comfort in it,
and I gave him 30s. fee.  So home again and to bed.  This day a good
pretty maid was sent my wife by Mary Bowyer, whom my wife has hired.

23rd.  To Westminster with my wife (she to her father's), and about 10
o'clock back again home, and there I to the office a little, and thence by
coach with Commissioner Pett to Cheapside to one Savill, a painter, who I
intend shall do my picture and my wife's.  Thence I to dinner at the
Wardrobe, and so home to the office, and there all the afternoon till
night, and then both Sir Williams to my house, and in comes Captain Cock,
and they to cards.  By and by Sir W. Batten and Cock, after drinking a
good deal of wine, went away, and Sir W. Pen staid with my wife and I to
supper, very pleasant, and so good night.  This day I have a chine of beef
sent home, which I bespoke to send, and did send it as a present to my
uncle Wight.

24th (Lord's day).  Up early, and by appointment to St. Clement Danes to
church, and there to meet Captain Cocke, who had often commended Mr.
Alsopp, their minister, to me, who is indeed an able man, but as all
things else did not come up to my expectations.  His text was that all
good and perfect gifts are from above.  Thence Cocke and I to the Sun
tavern behind the Exchange, and there met with others that are come from
the same church, and staid and drank and talked with them a little, and so
broke up, and I to the Wardrobe and there dined, and staid all the
afternoon with my Lady alone talking, and thence to see Madame Turner,
who, poor lady, continues very ill, and I begin to be afraid of her.
Thence homewards, and meeting Mr. Yong, the upholster, he and I to the
Mitre, and with Mr. Rawlinson sat and drank a quart of sack, and so I to
Sir W. Batten's and there staid and supped, and so home, where I found an
invitation sent my wife and I to my uncle Wight's on Tuesday next to the
chine of beef which I presented them with yesterday.  So to prayers and to
bed.

25th.  To Westminster Hall in the morning with Captain Lambert, and there
he did at the Dog give me and some other friends of his, his foy, he being
to set sail to-day towards the Streights.  Here we had oysters and good
wine.  Having this morning met in the Hall with Mr. Sanchy, we appointed
to meet at the play this afternoon.  At noon, at the rising of the House,
I met with Sir W. Pen and Major General Massy,

     [Major-General Edward Massey (or Massie), son of John Massie, was
     captain of one of the foot companies of the Irish Expedition, and
     had Oliver Cromwell as his ensign (see Peacock's "Army Lists in
     1642," p. 65).  He was Governor of Gloucester in its obstinate
     defence against the royal forces, 1643; dismissed by the self-
     denying ordinance when he entered Charles II's service.  He was
     taken prisoner at the battle of Worcester, September 3rd, 1651, but
     escaped abroad.]

who I find by discourse to be a very ingenious man, and among other things
a great master in the secresys of powder and fireworks, and another knight
to dinner, at the Swan, in the Palace yard, and our meat brought from the
Legg; and after dinner Sir W. Pen and I to the Theatre, and there saw "The
Country Captain," a dull play, and that being done, I left him with his
Torys

     [This is a strange use of the word Tory, and an early one also.  The
     word originally meant bogtrotters or wild Irish, and as Penn was
     Governor of Kildare these may have been some of his Irish followers.
     The term was not used politically until about 1679.]

and went to the Opera, and saw the last act of "The Bondman," and there
found Mr. Sanchy and Mrs. Mary Archer, sister to the fair Betty, whom I
did admire at Cambridge, and thence took them to the Fleece in Covent
Garden, there to bid good night to Sir W. Pen who staid for me; but Mr.
Sanchy could not by any argument get his lady to trust herself with him
into the tavern, which he was much troubled at, and so we returned
immediately into the city by coach, and at the Mitre in Cheapside there
light and drank, and then yet her at her uncle's in the Old Jewry.  And so
he and I back again thither, and drank till past 12 at night, till I had
drank something too much.  He all the while telling me his intention to
get a girl who is worth L1000, and many times we had her sister Betty's
health, whose memory I love.  At last parted, and I well home, only had
got cold and was hoarse and so to bed.

27th.  This morning our maid Dorothy and my wife parted, which though she
be a wench for her tongue not to be borne with, yet I was loth to part
with her, but I took my leave kindly of her and went out to Savill's, the
painter, and there sat the first time for my face with him; thence to
dinner with my Lady; and so after an hour or two's talk in divinity with
my Lady, Captain Ferrers and Mr. Moore and I to the Theatre, and there saw
"Hamlett" very well done, and so I home, and found that my wife had been
with my aunt Wight and Ferrers to wait on my Lady to-day this afternoon,
and there danced and were very merry, and my Lady very fond as she is
always of my wife.  So to bed.

28th.  At home all the morning; at noon Will brought me from Whitehall,
whither I had sent him, some letters from my Lord Sandwich, from Tangier;
where he continues still, and hath done some execution upon the Turks, and
retaken an Englishman from them, of one Mr. Parker's, a merchant in
Marke-lane.  In the afternoon Mr. Pett and I met at the office; there
being none more there than we two I saw there was not the reverence due to
us observed, and so I took occasion to break up and took Mr. Gawdon along
with me, and he and I (though it rained) were resolved to go, he to my
Lord Treasurer's and I to the Chancellor's with a letter from my Lord
to-day.  So to a tavern at the end of Mark Lane, and there we staid till
with much ado we got a coach, and so to my Lord Treasurer's and lost our
labours, then to the Chancellor's, and there met with Mr. Dugdale, and
with him and one Mr. Simons, I think that belongs to my Lord Hatton, and
Mr. Kipps and others, to the Fountain tavern, and there staid till twelve
at night drinking and singing, Mr. Simons and one Mr. Agar singing very
well.  Then Mr. Gawdon being almost drunk had the wit to be gone, and so I
took leave too, and it being a fine moonshine night he and I footed it all
the way home, but though he was drunk he went such a pace as I did admire
how he was able to go.  When I came home I found our new maid
Sarah--[Sarah did not stay long with Mrs. Pepys, who was continually
falling out with her.  She left to enter Sir William Penn's
service.]--come, who is a tall and a very well favoured wench, and one
that I think will please us.  So to bed.

29th.  I lay long in bed, till Sir Williams both sent me word that we were
to wait upon the Duke of York to-day; and that they would have me to meet
them at Westminster Hall, at noon: so I rose and went thither; and there I
understand that they are gone to Mr. Coventry's lodgings, in the Old
Palace Yard, to dinner (the first time I knew he had any); and there I met
them two and Sir G. Carteret, and had a very fine dinner, and good
welcome, and discourse; and so, by water, after dinner to White Hall to
the Duke, who met us in his closet; and there he did discourse to us the
business of Holmes, and did desire of us to know what hath been the common
practice about making of forrayne ships to strike sail to us, which they
did all do as much as they could; but I could say nothing to it, which I
was sorry for.  So indeed I was forced to study a lie, and so after we
were gone from the Duke, I told Mr. Coventry that I had heard Mr. Selden
often say, that he could prove that in Henry the 7th's time, he did give
commission to his captains to make the King of Denmark's ships to strike
to him in the Baltique.  From thence Sir W. Pen and I to the Theatre, but
it was so full that we could hardly get any room, so he went up to one of
the boxes, and I into the 18d.  places, and there saw "Love at first
sight," a play of Mr. Killigrew's, and the first time that it hath been
acted since before the troubles, and great expectation there was, but I
found the play to be a poor thing, and so I perceive every body else do.
So home, calling at Paul's Churchyard for a "Mare Clausum," having it in
my mind to write a little matter, what I can gather, about the business of
striking sayle, and present it to the Duke, which I now think will be a
good way to make myself known.  So home and to bed.

30th.  In the morning to the Temple, Mr. Philips and Dr. Williams about my
several law matters, and so to the Wardrobe to dinner, and after dinner
stole away, my Lady not dining out of her chamber, and so home and then to
the office all the afternoon, and that being done Sir W. Batten and I and
Captain Cock got a bottle of sack into the office, and there we sat late
and drank and talked, and so home and to bed.  I am this day in very good
health, only got a little cold.  The Parliament has sat a pretty while.
The old condemned judges of the late King have been brought before the
Parliament, and like to be hanged.  I am deep in Chancery against Tom
Trice, God give a good issue; and myself under great trouble for my late
great expending of money vainly, which God stop for the future.  This is
the last day for the old State's coyne

     [In a speech of Lord Lucas in the House of Lords, the 22nd February,
     1670-1 (which speech was burnt by the common hangman), he thus
     adverted to that coin: "It is evident that there is scarcity of
     money; for all the parliament's money called breeches (a fit stamp
     for the coin of the Rump) is wholly vanished--the king's
     proclamation and the Dutch have swept it all away, and of his now
     majesty's coin there appears but very little; so that in effect we
     have none left for common use, but a little old lean coined money of
     the late three former princes.  And what supply is preparing for it,
     my lords?  I hear of none, unless it be of copper farthings, and
     this is the metal that is to vindicate, according to the inscription
     on it, the dominion of the four seas."--Quoted in Penn's "Memorials
     of Sir Wm. Penn," ii.  264.]

to pass in common payments, but they say it is to pass in publique
payments to the King three months still.

                          DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS.
                                 DECEMBER
                                   1661

December 1st (Lord's day).  In the morning at church and heard Mr. Mills.
At home dined and with me by appointment Mr. Sanchy, who should have
brought his mistress, Mrs. Mary Archer, of Cambridge, but she could not
come, but we had a good dinner for him.  And so in the afternoon my wife
went to church, and he and I stayed at home and drank and talked, and he
stayed with me till night and supped with me, when I expected to have seen
Jack Cole and Lem. Wagstaffe, but they did not come.  We this day cut a
brave collar of brawn from Winchcombe which proves very good, and also
opened the glass of girkins which Captain Cocke did give my wife the other
day, which are rare things.  So at night to bed.  There hath lately been
great clapping up of some old statesmen, such as Ireton, Moyer, and
others, and they say, upon a great plot, but I believe no such thing; but
it is but justice that they should be served as they served the poor
Cavaliers; and I believe it will oftentimes be so as long as I live,
whether there be cause or no.  This evening my brother Tom was with me,
and I did talk again to him about Mr. Townsend's daughter, and I do intend
to put the business in hand.  I pray God give a good end to it.

2nd.  To Savill the painter's, but he not being well I could do nothing
there, and so I returned home, and in my way met Mr. Moore and took him
with me home; where we staid and talked all the morning, and he dined with
me, and after dinner went away to the Privy Seal, this being our first day
this month.  By and by called on by Mr. Sanchy and his mistress, and with
them by coach to the Opera, to see "The Mad Lover," but not much pleased
with the play.  That done home all to my house, where they staid and
supped and were merry, and at last late bid good night and so we to bed.

3rd.  To the Paynter's and sat and had more of my picture done; but it do
not please me, for I fear it will not be like me.  At noon from thence to
the Wardrobe, where dinner not being ready Mr. Moore and I to the Temple
about my little business at Mr. Turner's, and so back again, and dinner
being half done I went in to my Lady, where my Lady Wright was at dinner
with her, and all our talk about the great happiness that my Lady Wright
says there is in being in the fashion and in variety of fashions, in scorn
of others that are not so, as citizens' wives and country gentlewomen,
which though it did displease me enough, yet I said nothing to it.  Thence
by water to the office through bridge, being carried by him in oars that
the other day rowed in a scull faster than my oars to the Towre, and I did
give him 6d.  At the office all the afternoon, and at night home to read
in "Mare Clausum" till bedtime, and so to bed, but had a very bad night by
dreams of my wife's riding with me and her horse throwing her and breaking
her leg, and then I dreamed that I .  .  [was] in such pain that I waked
with it, and had a great deal of pain there a very great while till I fell
asleep again, and such apprehension I had of it that when I rose and
trussed up myself thinking that it had been no dream.  Till in the daytime
I found myself very well at ease, and remembered that I did dream so, and
that Mr. Creed was with me, and that I did complain to him of it, and he
said he had the same pain in his left that I had in my right .  .  .
which pleased me much to remember.

4th.  To Whitehall with both Sir Williams, thence by water, where I saw a
man lie dead upon Westminster Stairs that had been drowned yesterday.  To
the Temple, and thence to Mr. Phillips and got my copy of Sturtlow lands.
So back to the 3 Tuns at Charing Cross, and there met the two Sir Williams
and Col. Treswell and Mr. Falconer, and dined there at Sir W. Pen's cost,
and after dinner by water to Cheapside to the painter's, and there found
my wife, and having sat a little she and I by coach to the Opera and
Theatre, but coming too late to both, and myself being a little out of
tune we returned, and I settled to read in "Mare Clausum "till bedtime,
and so to bed.

5th.  This morning I went early to the Paynter's and there sat for my
picture the fourth time, but it do not yet please me, which do much
trouble me.  Thence to the Treasury Office, where I found Sir W. Batten
come before me, and there we sat to pay off the St. George.  By and by
came Sir W. Pen, and he and I staid while Sir W. Batten went home to
dinner, and then he came again, and Sir W. Pen and I went and dined at my
house, and had two mince pies sent thither by our order from the messenger
Slater, that had dressed some victuals for us, and so we were very merry,
and after dinner rode out in his coach, he to Whitehall, and my wife and I
to the Opera, and saw "Hamlett" well performed.  Thence to the Temple and
Mrs. Turner's (who continues still very ill), and so home and to bed.

6th.  Lay long in bed, and then to Westminster Hall and there walked, and
then with Mr. Spicer, Hawly, Washington, and little Mr. Ashwell (my old
friends at the Exchequer) to the Dog, and gave them two or three quarts of
wine, and so away to White Hall, where, at Sir G. Carteret's, Sir Williams
both and I dined very pleasantly; and after dinner, by appointment, came
the Governors of the East India Company, to sign and seal the contract
between us

     [Charles II.'s charter to the Company, confirming and extending the
     former charter, is dated April 3rd, 1661.  Bombay, just acquired as
     part of Queen Katherine's dowry, was made over to the Company by
     Letters Patent dated March 27th, 1669.]

(in the King's name) and them.  And that done, we all went to the King's
closet, and there spoke with the King and the Duke of York, who promise to
be very careful of the India trade to the utmost.  So back to Sir G.
Carteret's and ended our business, and so away homewards, but Sir W.
Batten offering to go to the 3 Tuns at Charing Cross, where the pretty
maid the daughter of the house is; I was saying that, that tickled Sir W.
Pen, he seemed to take these words very captiously and angrily, which I
saw, and seemed indifferent to go home in his coach with them, and so took
leave to go to the Council Chamber to speak with my Lord Privy Seal, which
I did, but they did stay for me, which I was pleased at, but no words
passed between him and me in all our way home.  So home and to bed.

7th.  This morning comes Captain Ferrers and the German, Emanuel Luffe,
who goes as one of my Lord's footmen, though he deserves a much better
preferment, to take their leave of me, and here I got the German to play
upon my theorbo, which he did both below and in my wife's chamber, who was
in bed.  He plays bravely.  I find by him that my lute is a most excellent
lute.  I did give them a mince pie and a collar of brawn and some wine for
their breakfast, and were very merry, and sent for Mr. Adamson's neighbour
to drink Mr. Shepley's health.  At last we all parted, but within a
quarter of an hour after they were gone, and my wife and I were talking
about buying of a fine scallop which is brought her this morning by a
woman to be sold, which is to cost her 45s., in comes the German back
again, all in a goare of blood, which I wondered at, and tells me that he
is afeard that the Captain is killed by the watermen at Towre Stayres; so
I presently went thither, and found that upon some rude pressing of the
watermen to ply the Captain, he struck one of them with his cane, which
they would not take, but struck him again, and then the German drew his
sword and ran at one of them, but they were both soundly beaten.

     [See a similar outrage, committed by Captain Ferrers, September
     12th, 1662.  Swords were usually worn by footmen.  See May 4th,
     1662, host.--B.]

The Captain is, however, got to the boy that carries him and the pages to
the Downs, and I went into the alehouse at the Stayres and got them to
deliver the Captain's feathers, which one from the Captain was come to
demand, and went home again, and there found my wife dressing of the
German's head, and so did [give] him a cravett for his neck, and a crown
in his purse, and sent him away again.  Then came Mr. Moore, and he and I
to Westminster and to Worcester House to see Mr. Montagu before he goes
away (this night), but could not see him, nor do I think he has a mind to
see us for fear of our demanding of money of him for anything.  So back to
Whitehall, and eat a bit of meat at Wilkinson's, and then to the Privy
Seal, and sealed there the first time this month; and, among other things
that passed, there was a patent for Roger Palmer (Madam Palmer's husband)
to be Earl of Castlemaine and Baron of Limbricke in Ireland; but the
honour is tied up to the males got of the body of this wife, the Lady
Barbary: the reason whereof every body knows.  That done, by water to the
office, when I found Sir W. Pen had been alone all the night and was just
rose, and so I to him, and with him I found Captain Holmes, who had wrote
his case, and gives me a copy, as he hath many among his friends, and
presented the same to the King and Council.  Which I shall make use of in
my attempt of writing something concerning the business of striking sail,
which I am now about.  But he do cry out against Sir John Minnes, as the
veriest knave and rogue and coward in the world, which I was glad to hear,
because he has given out bad words concerning my Lord, though I am sorry
it is so.  Here Captain Cox then came in, and he and I staid a good while
and so good night.  Home and wrote by the post to my father, and so to
bed.

8th (Lord's day).  In bed all the morning thinking to take physique, but
it being a frost my wife would not have me.  So to dinner at the Wardrobe,
and after a great deal of good discourse with my Lady after dinner, and
among other things of the great christening yesterday at Mr. Rumbell's,
and courtiers and pomp that was there, which I wonder at, I went away up
and down into all the churches almost between that place and my house, and
so home.  And then came my brother Tom, and staid and talked with me, and
I hope he will do very well and get money.  So to supper and to bed.  This
morning as I was in bed, one brings me T. Trice's answer to my bill in
chancery from Mr. Smallwood, which I am glad to see, though I am afraid it
will do me hurt.

9th.  To Whitehall, and thence to the Rhenish wine-house, where I met
Mons. Eschar and there took leave of him, he being to go this night to the
Downs towards Portugall, and so spent all the morning.  At noon to dinner
to the Wardrobe; where my Lady Wright was, who did talk much upon the
worth and the desert of gallantry; and that there was none fit to be
courtiers, but such as have been abroad and know fashions.  Which I
endeavoured to oppose; and was troubled to hear her talk so, though she be
a very wise and discreet lady in other things.  From thence Mr. Moore and
I to the Temple about my law business with my cozen Turner, and there we
read over T. Trice's answer to my bill and advised thereupon what to do in
his absence, he being to go out of town to-morrow.  Thence he and I to Mr.
Walpole, my attorney, whom I never saw before, and we all to an alehouse
hard by, and there we talked of our business, and he put me into great
hopes, but he is but a young man, and so I do not depend so much upon his
encouragement.  So by coach home, and to supper, and to bed, having staid
up till 12 at night writing letters to my Lord Sandwich and all my friends
with him at sea, to send to-morrow by Mons. Eschar, who goes tomorrow post
to the Downs to go along with the fleet to Portugall.

10th.  To Whitehall, and there finding Mons. Eschar to be gone, I sent my
letters by a porter to the posthouse in Southwark to be sent by despatch
to the Downs.  So to dinner to my Lord Crew's by coach, and in my way had
a stop of above an hour and a half, which is a great trouble this
Parliament time, but it cannot be helped.  However I got thither before my
Lord come from the House, and so dined with him, and dinner done, home to
the office, and there sat late and so home.

11th.  My brother Tom and then Mr. Moore came to me this morning, and
staid a while with me, and then I went out, and in my way met with Mr.
Howell the Turner, who invited me to dine this day at Mr. Rawlinson's with
some friends of his, officers of the Towre, at a venison pasty, which I
promised him, and so I went to the Old Bayly, and there staid and drank
with him, who told me the whole story how Pegg Kite has married herself to
a weaver, an ugly fellow, to her undoing, of which I am glad that I have
nothing to do in it.  From thence home and put on my velvet coat, and so
to the Mitre to dinner according to my promise this morning, but going up
into the room I found at least 12 or more persons, and knew not the face
of any of them, so I went down again, and though I met Mr. Yong the
upholster yet I would not be persuaded to stay, but went away and walked
to the Exchequer, and up and down, and was very hungry, and from thence
home, when I understand Mr. Howell was come for me to go thither, but I am
glad I was not at home, and my wife was gone out by coach to Clerkenwell
to see Mrs. Margaret Pen, who is at school there. So I went to see Sir W.
Pen, who for this two or three days has not been well, and he and I after
some talk took a coach and went to Moorfields, and there walked, though it
was very cold, an hour or two, and went into an alehouse, and there I
drank some ale and eat some bread and cheese, but he would not eat a bit,
and so being very merry we went home again. He to his lodgings and I by
promise to Sir W. Batten's, where he and my lady have gone out of town,
and so Mrs. Martha was at home alone, and Mrs. Moore and there I supped
upon some good things left of yesterday's dinner there, where dined a
great deal of company--Sir R. Browne and others--and by and by comes in
Captain Cox who promised to be here with me, but he staid very late, and
had been drinking somewhere and was very drunk, and so very capricious,
which I was troubled to see in a man that I took for a very wise and wary
man.  So I home and left him there, and so to bed.

12th.  We lay long in bed, then up and made me ready, and by and by come
Will Bowyer and Mr. Gregory, my old Exchequer friend, to see me, and I
took them to the Dolphin and there did give them a good morning draft, and
so parted, and invited them and all my old Exchequer acquaintance to come
and dine with me there on Wednesday next.  From thence to the Wardrobe and
dined with my Lady, where her brother, Mr. John Crew, dined also, and a
strange gentlewoman dined at the table as a servant of my Lady's; but I
knew her not, and so I am afeard that poor Madamoiselle was gone, but I
since understand that she is come as housekeeper to my Lady, and is a
married woman.  From thence to Westminster to my Lord's house to meet my
Lord Privy Seal, who appointed to seal there this afternoon, but by and by
word is brought that he is come to Whitehall, and so we are fain to go
thither to him, and there we staid to seal till it was so late that though
I got leave to go away before he had done, yet the office was done before
I could get thither, and so to Sir W. Pen's, and there sat and talked and
drank with him, and so home.

13th.  At home all the morning, being by the cold weather, which for these
two days has been frost, in some pain in my bladder.  Dined at home and
then with my wife to the Paynter's, and there she sat the first time to be
drawn, while I all the while stood looking on a pretty lady's picture,
whose face did please me extremely.  At last, he having done, I found that
the dead colour of my wife is good, above what I expected, which pleased
me exceedingly.  So home and to the office about some special business,
where Sir Williams both were, and from thence with them to the Steelyard,
where my Lady Batten and others came to us, and there we drank and had
musique and Captain Cox's company, and he paid all, and so late back again
home by coach, and so to bed.

14th.  All the morning at home lying in bed with my wife till 11 o'clock.
Such a habit we have got this winter of lying long abed.  Dined at home,
and in the afternoon to the office.  There sat late, and so home and to
bed.

15th (Lord's day).  To church in the morning, where our young Reader begun
the first day to read.  Sir W. Pen dined with me and we were merry. Again
to church and so home, and all alone read till bedtime, and so to prayers
and to bed.  I have been troubled this day about a difference between my
wife and her maid Nell, who is a simple slut, and I am afeard we shall
find her a cross-grained wench.  I am now full of study about writing
something about our making of strangers strike to us at sea; and so am
altogether reading Selden and Grotius, and such other authors to that
purpose.

16th.  Up by five o'clock this morning by candlelight (which I have not
done for many a day), being called upon by one Mr. Bollen by appointment,
who has business to be done with my Lord Privy Seal this morning, and so
by coach, calling Mr. Moore at the Wardrobe, to Chelsy, and there did get
my Lord to seal it.  And so back again to Westminster Hall, and thence to
my Lord Sandwich's lodging, where I met my wife (who had been to see Mrs.
Hunt who was brought to bed the other day of a boy), and got a joint of
meat thither from the Cook's, and she and I and Sarah dined together, and
after dinner to the Opera, where there was a new play ("Cutter of Coleman
Street"),

     [Cutter, an old word for a rough swaggerer: hence the title of
     Cowley's play.  It was originally called "The Guardian," when acted
     before Prince Charles at Trinity College, Cambridge, on March 12th,
     1641.]

made in the year 1658, with reflections much upon the late times; and it
being the first time, the pay was doubled, and so to save money, my wife
and I went up into the gallery, and there sat and saw very well; and a
very good play it is.  It seems of Cowly's making.  From thence by coach
home, and to bed.

17th.  Up and to the Paynter's to see how he went forward in our picture.
So back again to dinner at home, and then was sent for to the Privy Seal,
whither I was forced to go and stay so long and late that I was much
vexed.  At last we got all done, and then made haste to the office, where
they were sat, and there we sat late, and so home to supper and to Selden,
"Mare Clausum," and so to bed.

18th.  At the office upon business extraordinary all the morning, then to
my Lady Sandwich's to dinner, whither my wife, who had been at the
painter's, came to me, and there dined, and there I left her, and to the
Temple my brother and I to see Mrs. Turner, who begins to be better, and
so back to my Lady's, where much made of, and so home to my study till
bed-time, and so to bed.

19th.  This morning my wife dressed herself fine to go to the christening
of Mrs. Hunt's child, and so she and I in the way in the morning went to
the Paynter s, and there she sat till noon, and I all the while looking
over great variety of good prints which he had, and by and by comes my boy
to tell us that Mrs. Hunt has been at our house to tell us that the
christening is not till Saturday next.  So after the Paynter had done I
did like the picture pretty well, and my wife and I went by coach home,
but in the way I took occasion to fall out with my wife very highly about
her ribbands being ill matched and of two colours, and to very high words,
so that, like a passionate fool, I did call her whore, for which I was
afterwards sorry.  But I set her down at home, and went myself by
appointment to the Dolphin, where Sir W. Warren did give us all a good
dinner, and that being done, to the office, and there sat late, and so
home.

20th.  Lay long in bed, and then up, and so to the Wardrobe to dinner, and
from thence out with Mr. Moore towards my house, and in our way met with
Mr. Swan (my old acquaintance), and we to a tavern, where we had enough of
his old simple religious talk, and he is still a coxcomb in these things
as he ever was, and tells me he is setting out a book called "The
unlawfull use of lawfull things;" but a very simple fellow he is, and so I
leave him.  So we drank and at last parted, and Mr. Moore and I into
Cornhill, it being dark night, and in the street and on the Exchange
discoursed about Dominion of the Sea, wherein I am lately so much
concerned, and so I home and sat late up reading of Mr. Selden, and so to
bed.

21st.  To White Hall to the Privy Seal, where my Lord Privy Seal did tell
us he could seal no more this month, for that he goes thirty miles out of
town to keep his Christmas.  At which I was glad, but only afeard lest any
thing of the King's should force us to go after him to get a seal in the
country.  Thence to Westminster Hall (having by the way drank with Mrs.
Sarah and Mrs. Betty at my Lord's lodgings), and thence taken by some
Exchequer men to the Dogg, where, being St. Thomas's day, by custom they
have a general meeting at dinner.  There I was and all very merry, and
there I spoke to Mr. Falconberge to look whether he could out of Domesday
Book, give me any thing concerning the sea, and the dominion thereof;
which he says he will look after.  Thence taking leave to my brother's,
and there by appointment met with Prior of Brampton who had money to pay
me, but desiring some advice he stays till Monday.  So by coach home to
the office, where I was vexed to see Sir Williams both seem to think so
much that I should be a little out of the way, saying that without their
Register they were not a Committee, which I took in some dudgeon, and see
clearly that I must keep myself at a little distance with them and not
crouch, or else I shall never keep myself up even with them.  So home and
wrote letters by the post.  This evening my wife come home from
christening Mrs. Hunt's son, his name John, and a merchant in Mark Lane
came along with her, that was her partner.  So after my business was done,
and read something in Mr. Selden, I went to bed.

22nd.  To church in the morning, where the Reader made a boyish young
sermon.  Home to dinner, and there I took occasion, from the blacknesse of
the meat as it came out of the pot, to fall out with my wife and my maid
for their sluttery, and so left the table, and went up to read in Mr.
Selden till church time, and then my wife and I to church, and there in
the pew, with the rest of the company, was Captain Holmes, in his
gold-laced suit, at which I was troubled because of the old business which
he attempted upon my wife.  So with my mind troubled I sat still, but by
and by I took occasion from the rain now holding up (it raining when we
came into the church) to put my wife in mind of going to the christening
(which she was invited to) of N. Osborne's child, which she did, and so
went out of the pew, and my mind was eased.  So home after sermon and
there came by appointment Dr. T. Pepys, Will. Joyce, and my brother Tom,
and supped with me, and very merry they were, and I seemed to be, but I
was not pleased at all with their company.  So they being gone we went to
bed.

23rd.  Early up and by coach (before daylight) to the Wardrobe, and took
up Mr. Moore, and he and I to Chelsy to my Lord Privy Seal, and there
sealed some things, he being to go out of town for all Christmas
to-morrow.  So back again to Westminster, and from thence by water to the
Treasury Office, where I found Sir W. Pen paying off the Sophia and
Griffen, and there I staid with him till noon, and having sent for some
collar of beef and a mince pie, we eat and drank, and so I left him there
and to my brother's by appointment to meet Prior, but he came not, so I
went and saw Mrs. Turner who continues weak, and by and by word was
brought me that Prior's man was come to Tom's, and so I went and told out
L128 which I am to receive of him, but Prior not coming I went away and
left the money by his desire with my brother all night, and they to come
to me to-morrow morning.  So I took coach, and lighting at my bookseller's
in Paul's Churchyard, I met with Mr. Crumlum and the second master of
Paul's School, and thence I took them to the Starr, and there we sat and
talked, and I had great pleasure in their company, and very glad I was of
meeting him so accidentally, I having omitted too long to go to see him.
Here in discourse of books I did offer to give the school what books he
would choose of L5.  So we parted, and I home, and to Mr. Selden, and then
to bed.

24th.  Home all the morning and dined at home, and in the afternoon to the
office.  So home.

25th.  In the morning to church, where at the door of our pew I was fain
to stay, because that the sexton had not opened the door.  A good sermon
of Mr. Mills.  Dined at home all alone, and taking occasion from some
fault in the meat to complain of my maid's sluttery, my wife and I fell
out, and I up to my chamber in a discontent.  After dinner my wife comes
up to me and all friends again, and she and I to walk upon the leads, and
there Sir W. Pen called us, and we went to his house and supped with him,
but before supper Captain Cock came to us half drunk, and began to talk,
but Sir W. Pen knowing his humour and that there was no end of his
talking, drinks four great glasses of wine to him, one after another,
healths to the king, and by that means made him drunk, and so he went
away, and so we sat down to supper, and were merry, and so after supper
home and to bed.

26th.  This morning Sir W. Pen and I to the Treasury office, and there we
paid off the Amity (Captain Stokes's ship that was at Guinny) and another
ship, and so home, and after dinner Sir William came to me, and he and his
son and Aaugliter, and I and my wife, by coach to Moorfields to walk; but
it was most foul weather, and so we went into an alehouse and there eat
some cakes and ale, and a washeallbowle

             ["The wenches with their wassall bowls
               About the streets are singing."
                         --Wither's Christmas Carol.

     The old custom of carrying the wassail bowl from door to door, with
     songs and merriment, in Christmas week, is still observed in some of
     our rural districts.--B.]

woman and girl came to us and sung to us.  And after all was done I called
my boy (Wayneman) to us to eat some cake that was left, and the woman of
the house told us that he had called for two cakes and a pot of ale for
himself, at which I was angry, and am resolved to correct him for it.  So
home, and Sir W. Pen and his son and daughter to supper to me to a good
turkey, and were merry at cards, and so to bed.

27th.  In the morning to my Bookseller's to bespeak a Stephens's
Thesaurus, for which I offer L4, to give to Paul's School; and from thence
to Paul's Church; and there I heard Dr. Gunning preach a good sermon upon
the day (being St. John's day), and did hear him tell a story, which he
did persuade us to believe to be true, that St. John and the Virgin Mary
did appear to Gregory, a Bishopp, at his prayer to be confirmed in the
faith, which I did wonder to hear from him.  Here I met with Mr. Crumlum
(and told him of my endeavour to get Stephens's Thesaurus for the school),
and so home, and after dinner comes Mr. Faulconberge to see me, and at his
desire I sent over for his kinsman Mr. Knightly, the merchant, and so he
came over and sat and drank with us, and at his request I went over with
him, and there I sat till the evening, and till both Mr. Knightly and Mr.
Faulconberge (for whom I sent my boy to get a coach to carry him to
Westminster) were both drunk, and so home, but better wine I never drank
in all my life.  So home, and finding my wife gone to Sir W. Pen's, I went
thither, and there I sat and played at cards and supped, and so home and
to bed.

28th.  At home all the morning; and in the afternoon all of us at the
office, upon a letter from the Duke for the making up of a speedy estimate
of all the debts of the Navy, which is put into good forwardness.  I home
and Sir W. Pen to my house, who with his children staid playing cards
late, and so to bed.

29th (Lord's day).  Long in bed with my wife, and though I had determined
to go to dine with my wife at my Lady's, (chiefly to put off dining with
Sir W. Pen to-day because Holmes dined there), yet I could not get a coach
time enough to go thither, and so I dined at home, and my brother Tom with
me, and then a coach came and I carried my wife to Westminster, and she
went to see Mrs. Hunt, and I to the Abbey, and there meeting with Mr.
Hooper, he took me in among the quire, and there I sang with them their
service, and so that being done, I walked up and down till night for that
Mr. Coventry was not come to Whitehall since dinner again.  At last I went
thither and he was come, and I spoke with him about some business of the
office, and so took leave of him, and sent for my wife and the coach, and
so to the Wardrobe and supped, and staid very long talking with my Lady,
who seems to doat every day more and more upon us. So home and to prayers,
and to bed.

30th.  At the office about this estimate and so with my wife and Sir W.
Pen to see our pictures, which do not much displease us, and so back
again, and I staid at the Mitre, whither I had invited all my old
acquaintance of the Exchequer to a good chine of beef, which with three
barrels of oysters and three pullets, and plenty of wine and mirth, was
our dinner, and there was about twelve of us, among others Mr. Bowyer, the
old man, and Mr. Faulconberge, Shadwell, Taylor, Spicer, Woodruffe (who by
reason of some friend that dined with him came to us after dinner),
Servington, &c., and here I made them a foolish promise to give them one
this day twelvemonth, and so for ever while I live, but I do not intend
it.  Mere I staid as long as I could keep them, and so home to Sir W. Pen,
who with his children and my wife has been at a play to-day and saw
"D'Ambois," which I never saw.  Here we staid late at supper and playing
at cards, and so home and

31st.  My wife and I this morning to the Paynter's, and there she sat the
last time, and I stood by and did tell him some little things to do, that
now her picture I think will please me very well; and after her, her
little black dogg sat in her lap; and was drawn, which made us very merry;
so home to dinner, and so to the office; and there late finishing our
estimate of the debts of the Navy to this day; and it come to near
L374,000.  So home, and after supper, and my barber had trimmed me, I sat
down to end my journell for this year, and my condition at this time, by
God's blessing, is thus:  my health (only upon catching cold, which brings
great pain in my back .  .  .  as it used to be when I had the stone) is
very good, and so my wife's in all respects: my servants, W. Hewer, Sarah,
Nell, and Wayneman: my house at the Navy Office.  I suppose myself to be
worth about L500 clear in the world, and my goods of my house my own, and
what is coming to me from Brampton, when my father dies, which God defer.
But, by my uncle's death, the whole care and trouble of all, and settling
of all lies upon me, which is very great, because of law-suits, especially
that with T. Trice, about the interest of L200, which will, I hope, be
ended soon.  My chiefest thought is now to get a good wife for Tom, there
being one offered by the Joyces, a cozen of theirs, worth L200 in ready
money.  I am also upon writing a little treatise to present to the Duke,
about our privilege in the seas, as to other nations striking their flags
to us.  But my greatest trouble is, that I have for this last half year
been a very great spendthrift in all manner of respects, that I am afeard
to cast up my accounts, though I hope I am worth what I say above.  But I
will cast them up very shortly. I have newly taken a solemn oath about
abstaining from plays and wine, which I am resolved to keep according to
the letter of the oath which I keep by me.  The fleet hath been ready to
sail for Portugall, but hath lacked wind this fortnight, and by that means
my Lord is forced to keep at sea all this winter, till he brings home the
Queen, which is the expectation of all now, and the greatest matter of
publique talk.